Title: Religious Mythopoeia and Existentialism
Author: George French
Published: 7/06/25
Category: Essays
Thumbnail: victory-of-joshua-over-the-amalekites.jpg
Indent: True


I. Man as Mythopoet

Human beings are myth-makers. It may be one of our oldest activities. Archaeologists continue to unearth evidence that our ancient ancestors, as far back as the time of the Neanderthal, buried their dead with small tools and other trinkets, possible evidence of a belief in an afterlife. The archaeological record suggests that some of humanity’s earliest mythmaking behavior emerged out of an awareness of death. This should give us pause. Why would our ancestors spend time telling myths when the burden of daily survival gave them enough to think about? Perhaps it was because they, like us, were curious about the world and had a deep concern with how to *live*, not merely with how to *survive*. Our ancestors did not tell myths to amuse themselves or to ease the fear of death (at least not primarily). They told myths in order to orient themselves in the unsearchable mystery of human existence, with all of its wonders and sorrows. They wanted to chart a trustworthy course through its defining features – life, love, suffering, and death.[^1]

Allow me to roughly outline what I mean by “myth”. I do not use this word in the modern sense. Today, a myth is little more than a tall tale or an unsubstantiated claim. However, I hold that *a myth is a creative effort intended to make sense of life and to narrate and disclose what is essential and universal about the human experience*. Myths are often told through stories, but it can also be communicated in paintings, dances, songs, and other media. They may be true even if they are not scientifically or historically true. *A myth is true to the degree that it makes sense of reality and human experience.* For example, Homer’s *Odyssey* is a true myth regardless of whether or not it accurately describes historical events. It is more than a tale about a man trying to sail home. It is the story of every homesick traveller, every pair of separated lovers, every band of friends pitted against the forces of nature, every wandering beggar, and everyone who has ever felt himself pitted against the gods and nature. We are each Odysseus in some aspect, and Odysseus is all of us. This is what makes for a true myth. The *Odyssey* may even be more helpful than historical accounts of Odysseus’ life insofar as it grapples with core elements of the human experience.

Given their nature, we should not be surprised that the same archetypal themes reemerge time and again in mythologies across the globe. Common tropes include a lost ancestral paradise, treacherous serpents, great floods, warring twins, lands of giants, the overthrowing of a tyrannical father figure, great heroes with a tragic flaw, journeys to the underworld, and a postmortem judgment. The commonalities are staggering, and I think their abundance merits further reflection. How can Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Babylonian, Amerindian, Caribbean, Greek, Norse, Hindu, Jewish, West African, and Aboriginal mythologies be so similar when they developed in such vastly different geographical, historical, and cultural environments? The most plausible answer is that they are drawn from the same imaginative wellspring: the human psyche. The world has radically changed over the years, but humans fundamentally have not. We are still mythmakers, and we make myths (whether we know it or not) for the same reasons.

There is clear evidence of this in everyday speech in the way we often try to narrativize our lives. Motivational speakers tell us to “write your own story”. Pivotal life events are referred to as “the end of an era” or the marking of “a new chapter”. We describe people as having “main character energy”. Online quizzes tell us what Harry Potter house, Avatar tribe, or Middle Earth race we belong to. We fit ourselves to personal aesthetics like “dark academia” or “cottagecore”. The list goes on. Thousands of years after our ancestor’s told the first fireside tales, we still find ourselves trying to understand our lives using narrative. The mythopoeic spirit lives on in us. With this in mind, we turn now to a modern myth: the intellectual movement known as existentialism.

II. The Birth of a Myth

For many reasons, the twentieth century stands out in human history as uniquely tumultuous. The world population grew like never before. Standards of living rose across the globe. Entire infectious diseases were eradicated. Technology like automobiles, typewriters, home appliances, and mass media irrevocably altered daily living. Physicists began probing the weirdness of the quantum world while a patent clerk proved Newton wrong. The world went to war – twice. Atomic weapons were designed, built, tested, and *used*. A man set foot on the moon. The Human Genome Project began. The Internet was introduced. And that’s to say nothing about decolonization, globalization, environmentalism, the Civil Rights movement, women’s suffrage, and the Cold War. No other century compares to the staggering degree of suffering and triumph that humanity endured during this one.

It is no wonder that the generations born into this time struggled to find their voices. Living in the 21st century, we cannot fathom how radically different the world once was. Our lives are intertwined with instant communication and global culture. But if we could imagine for just a moment what it would be like to live without these things, and then to have them thrust upon us all at once, we would begin to understand the literary, artistic, philosophical, and religious movements that emerged from the 20th century. One can see how totalitarian suppressions of individuality led to brutalist architecture, how dramatic social upheaval precipitated the expressionist movement in the arts, or how the undetermined place of women in society encouraged the *femme fatale* trope of noir cinema.

Existentialism is one of these movements. It emerged as a violent reaction to essentialism, a view that held sway for millennia. The essentialist holds that man is born with an essence, what we call *human nature*. He does not need to question who he is or what he is for, he can simply consider the fact that he is a human person. For example, Aristotle thought that there was an essential activity that human beings could participate in that no other animal could – rational thought.[^2] Human flourishing, then, consisted in living rationally. However, the World Wars’ wanton waste and destruction of human life and culture makes the essentialist view much harder to swallow. Are we not, after all, like every other living creature, ripping and tearing at each other to get what we want? Is it really virtue that drives men to noble deeds, or is it just blind, animal panic in the face of death? Do we really have immortal souls attuned to goodness, truth, and beauty, or are we, as a fellow student of mine once put it, “just bags of meat” at the end of the day? These questions tempt us to nihilism, the view that there is no meaning in life whatsoever. Existentialism arose as a response to this.

The existentialist myth runs something like this. We are thrown into the world suddenly and without our consent. Soon after, we are confronted with questions about life, death, love, meaning, and existence. These questions reveal to us that, unlike the rest of the animal kingdom which is guided entirely by instinct, we are both blessed and cursed with *freedom*. We can, if we choose, override our animal instincts. It is up to us to decide how we are going to live. The recognition of our freedom is often frightening and leaves us in a state of *anxiety*, what Kierkegaard calls “angst” and Satre “nausea”. Of course, the world around us offers many ready-made answers to life’s greatest questions, but accepting them comes with a cost: we will have to sacrifice our *authenticity*. Religious doctrines, political ideologies, fashion trends, mainstream entertainment, social conventions, economic systems, and the like constantly encourage us to fit in with the crowd. But if we want to live truly authentic lives, we cannot accept the easy answers given to us by those who claim to have them. We must engage with the absurdities of the world and to strike out on the path of self-discovery and self-interpretation. Ultimately, the only answers to the biggest questions of life that we should accept are those which we discover and create for ourselves. No one can do it for us.[^3]

These three key concepts in existentialism – freedom, anxiety, and authenticity – are very familiar to the modern generation. In our digital age, we are constantly bombarded with news of tragedies from around the world, news about starving refugees, marginalized identities, social injustices, and a dying planet. Many young men and women feel pessimistic about the future yet completely paralyzed by the thought of trying to help. I have felt this way myself. Existentialism offers a way of living in a world we do not understand. It tells us that the world is in shambles because the powers-at-be are sustained by our conformity to the status quo. Our greatest act of rebellion is to live authentic lives, to define ourselves against the expectations being thrust upon us, and to chart our own course. Many young people subscribe to this philosophy unconsciously. It lies at the center of our culture of self-invention and self-identification.

However, the fruit of the existentialist myth should give us pause. It seems like every year we hear of more hatred on the Internet, more division in politics, more young people committing violent crimes, more pessimism about the future, and more cases of depression and social isolation. Of course, there are many factors that contribute to these statistics, but we ought to ask ourselves whether living the existentialist myth, consciously or not, encourages these trends.

Up to this point, I have given existentialism the status of a myth, but in many regards it is more like an *anti-myth*. Historically, myths would put the listeners in touch with transcendent reality. Existentialism aims for a different kind of transcendence, one of self-determination and self-expression. These two forms of transcendence could not be more different. Once, the tribal hunter felt himself participating in the Great Hunt in the Sky as he pulled back his bow, animated by the strength of Orion himself. Now, the existentialist stares into the cold expanse of outer space, declaring to the void that he is unique, the pattern of no higher image than himself.

III. And the Myth Became Flesh

I was once taken with the existentialist myth. The fascination began around my freshman year of college when I lived alone in a small dorm. The global pandemic ensured that I lived in near-constant isolation, connecting with others mostly online. I made efforts to meet people and to build good habits, but it was difficult. I had plenty of time to think, and I began to think deeply about the Christian faith that I had inherited. I was soon engaging with atheist thought online. And it was not long before I discovered Nietzsche.

Any religious person who has ever seriously read Nietzsche knows how dangerous he can be. I can still remember, clear as day, when I finished reading *Beyond Good and Evil* in the public library. I was disturbed by his refutation of objective truth. It was not his arguments that enticed me, but his passion. Here was a man who meant every word that he wrote. Unfortunately, I absorbed the worst of what Nietzsche had to say, missing nearly all the wisdom. The same became true for Dostoevsky, Camus, Kierkegaard, and other existentialist writers.

Though I still sincerely believed myself to be a Christian, my life was slowly becoming animated by a new myth, the existentialist myth. I felt small in the face of the “gentle indifference of the world.”[^4] But I loved the drama of that feeling. There I was, one of billions of inhabitants of one of the billions of planets in the universe, and I was going to make something of myself. And if I fail…well, *c’est la vie*.

I was Odysseus, shipwrecked on foreign soil, trapped there in the clutches of an unwanted lover. Deep down, I longed for the warmth and homeliness of my lost faith. It would be many months of soul-searching before I arrived back on familiar shores. The odyssey of my deeper conversion taught me that Christianity (the Christ-myth) is meant to be *lived*, not merely *subscribed* to. It was something that could only be understood from the inside, by plunging into the mystery. This gave me a richer understanding of religion, and I am now convinced that religious myths are uniquely powerful.

A myth serves to pull back the curtain and remind us of the true nature of reality. In other words, it reminds us of what is *real*. However, religious myths stand apart in that they make us a promise – that we can be reunited to this ultimate reality, to God. The very etymology of religion from the Latin *religio*, which means “linking back”, suggests this. Joseph Campbell describes how this occurs.[^5] One can engage with myths on different levels. The basest is sensual, where myths are just fun stories to stir up an emotional response in the listener. Religious stories often prompt too many questions to succeed at this. Then there is the level of willpower where myths serve as aids in overcoming the obstacles of life. Again, religious myths hardly stand out here. The highest level of engagement is “the level of the heart”. At this level, myths open us up to transcendent values. In order to reach this level, one must undergo an “opening of the heart.” The heart is that innermost chamber of the human person. To open one’s heart means to go outside of oneself, to be willing to give oneself over to the myth. Although Campbell does not make this distinction, I think this is where religious myths shine. By *living* religious myths and not merely *subscribing* to them, we allow ourselves to be transformed. Practically, this looks like praying, spiritual reading, attending liturgy, following our conscience, and abstaining from whatever draws our hearts away from God. In doing so, we begin to understand myths in an *experiential way*. 

A personal example of this relates to the problem of evil which has plagued Christians for centuries. Is the amount and severity of suffering that we see in our world what we would expect from an all-powerful, all-loving Creator? Two millennia of Christian theology produced many responses to this question, yet it persists because people often mean the question in a far more personal way. They are not asking, “Why, logically speaking, does evil exist?”, but rather, “Why is God letting me (or someone I love) suffer?” Clever arguments fail here because this is a question not of the mind, but of the heart. To this question, Christianity has only one answer: the Cross. The significance of the Cross is that God freely chooses to enter into humanity’s pain and to suffer alongside us. He does not patronize us, nor does He punish us for our weakness. Instead, He takes on human flesh and *shows us how to suffer*. In this way, our suffering, which would otherwise be senseless and cruel, becomes redemptive. I realized this when I decided to practice uniting my sufferings to Christ’s own. I began to accept my pain, not with stoic indifference, but with the humble resignation to suffer like Christ did. I resolved to learn from Him how to face Calvary. Everything changed. I began to understand how suffering served God’s loving plan, but in a radically new way. The difference was like the difference between reading about an apple and tasting one. This is the uniqueness of religious myths. They have the power to transform us, but only if we totally surrender to them. There are no half-saints. This requires boldness, a willingness to step into the unknown. This is what Kierkegaard meant by his “leap of faith” and Pascal by his infamous wager.

The great virtue of the existentialist myth is that it discourages its practitioners from disconnecting from the world. The existentialist is meant to live life for himself, not mediated through others or institutions. However, without any values higher than himself, he is a traveller without a compass. Religious myths offer him this and more, but only if he is first willing to open his heart, to see himself as a reflection of the one true Self.

I choose to remain a Christian because the Christ-myth surpasses all others. The Christian tradition understands all myths (religious or otherwise) as mere shadows of this one. Christ is the fulfillment of Odin hanging from Yggdrasil, Orpheus descending into Hades, and King Arthur preparing to return; and they each reflect Him, even if only dimly. He is the place where the narrative touched history and “myth became fact.”[^6] Humans have and will always seek for truth by narrativizing their lives, and Christ is God’s story breaking into human history. When one understands his past, present, and future – even the most painful moments – through the life of Christ, he satisfies his need for mythology by understanding his place in the cosmic theodrama. Finally, the love of God poured out on the Cross is the fulfillment of existentialism, because it gives humanity a redemption story which can be entered into and experienced.

## Works Cited:

Armstrong, Karen. “What is a Myth?” In *A Short History of Myth*, 1-11. United Kingdom: Canongate, 2005\.

Campbell, Joseph. *The Power of Myth*. New York: Anchor Books, 1991\.

Camus, Albert. *The Stranger*. Translated by Matthew Ward. New York: Random House, 1989\.

Lewis, Clive Staples. “Myth Became Fact.” In *God In The Dock*, 66-67. Grand Rapids: Eerdmanns, 1998\.

Aho, K. “Existentialism.” In *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Summer 2023 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. [https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2023/entries/existentialism/](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2023/entries/existentialism/).

## Footnotes:

[^1]:  Armstrong, “What is a Myth?”.

[^2]:  Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics*, 1097a15-1098a20.

[^3]:  Aho, “Existentialism”.

[^4]:  Camus, *The Stranger*, 122\.

[^5]:  Campbell. *The Power of Myth*, 267-8.

[^6]:  Lewis, “Myth Became Fact.”
