Title: Thematic Structure in Proust’s Swann’s Way
Author: Isaiah Riddle
Published: 7/06/25
Category: Essays
Thumbnail: simon-vouet-sophonisba-receiving-the-poisoned-chalice-wga25358.jpg
Indent: true
  
“When we are asleep and a raging toothache is as yet perceived by us only in the form of a girl whom we attempt to pull out of the water or a line by Molière that we repeat to ourselves incessantly, it is a great relief to wake up so that our intelligence can divest the idea of raging toothache of its disguise of heroism or cadence.” (Proust 28\)

This sentence from the Overture of *Swann’s Way* models two major elements of Proust’s writing style. First, Proust writes sentences that flow, refusing to stop or even rest along extended trains of thought. Second, Proust writes structurally nested sentences, where clauses are embedded inside other clauses. These features characterize his sentence writing, but they go beyond the sentence as well. Proust’s flow and nested structure dominate his syntactic style, but they also become integral, thematic elements of the work as a whole. Proust’s writing revolves around these elements both in form and content.  
The flow of Proust’s writing on the sentence level stems from a stream of consciousness, where the rapid thoughts of the mind are most important. Proust writes long sentences. The section quoted above is a single sentence, yet it has four different ideas woven together into one unit. The section above also has frighteningly little punctuation. Proust does not guide readers through his free-flowing prose, but instead leaves them to work out the meaning, or meanings, themselves. When Proust does use punctuation in other sentences, he relies heavily on commas and semi-colons to communicate the meaning. All these punctuation choices are centered around the idea of flow. There are no full stops. One sentence or clause leads directly into the next, continuing for much longer than the reader would expect grammatically. Despite the length and lack of formal punctuation guidance, Proust’s prose remains quick and light. It exudes a seeming ease and elegance because it is written as a flow of consciousness. The image of a toothache can morph into a girl or a line of poetry before it morphs back into a toothache. The images seem to have nothing in common in isolation, but when they appear together in the author’s head and in the sentence, the mental images develop together. The style is not forced since it flows naturally from the mind. Stream of consciousness expands the contents of the sentences.  
The idea of flow and consciousness, however, expands beyond the basic sentences, as important themes of the work itself. The opening section of the Overture is effectively a treatise on stream of consciousness. Proust writes about the stream through the metaphor of sleep, a physical way to deal with consciousness on a level that the ordinary man understands. The universal experiences of sleeping, waking up, and feeling pain while asleep become explorations of consciousness. Stream of consciousness dominates the first section of Proust’s work. The sentence structure demonstrates it, and the metaphors explain it. The opening pages set up consciousness as a theme for the rest of the novel. Much of *Swann’s Way*, with the exception of “Swann in Love,” lacks a concrete narrative. It has little action. Instead, Proust writes a narrative of consciousness, where narrative scenes bend and fold into each other. Proust follows the stream of his mind until all the various thoughts and memories unravel themselves. Not only is the narrative written with a structural flow, the characters act in the same way. The characters, particularly young Marcel and his older narrator-self, think and operate in the stream. They are subject to the flow of their minds, in a way that Proust would identify as true to life.  Stream of consciousness, the flow of the mind, becomes central to Proust’s work, not merely as a structural element, but as a major theme of the work.  
The second major element of Proust’s writing is the nested structure of the sentence, where clauses are inserted into other clauses. The syntactic framework of the sentence grows more and more complex with each phrase. The quoted sentence above has one central idea: the image of a toothache while asleep. In order to describe this central idea, Proust uses two other images: the girl and the line of poetry. These secondary images are linked to the central image, but even they separate further into tertiary images: “we attempt to pull \[the girl\] out of the water” and “we repeat” the poetry “to ourselves incessantly” (28). These tertiary images, in turn, have more clauses that further the image. The sentence buries into itself, moving further and further from the central image until it finally returns at the end. Each phrase hooks onto the previous one until the links form the chain of a sentence. Importantly for Proust, each image introduced becomes fully fleshed out in this structural system. Each image follows its own train of thought. New ideas trick readers into thinking they are quick asides or descriptive rabbit trails. As the image continues to be described, however, it becomes just as central to the narrative as the original thought, sometimes more so. The quoted sentence above models the importance of buried clauses over the initial image. Though the toothache seems to be central, the sentence ends with “heroism and cadence,” direct links to the embedded phrases (28). The structure of inserted images and clauses expands the world of the sentence far beyond what the reader expects from it.  
Proust embeds phrases, descriptions, and clauses in his sentences, but this nested structure works more broadly as well. The sentence quoted above comes from Combray I, the first of four sections in Proust’s *Swann’s Way*. *Swann’s Way* itself makes up the first book in the larger seven volume work, *In Search of Lost Time*. Embedded sections are the essence of the work as a whole. Each one can stand alone; they are complete by themselves, but each one adds to the larger work. Within the sections, the narrative cuts back and forth from scene to scene. Sometimes, the resolution of one scene is not revealed until pages later. Because the nested structure is so pervasive in the work, it moves beyond structure and becomes thematic. The nested structure defines the progression of the narrative. Embedded components of the work are not just stylistic choices, but thematic keys to understanding how the characters interact and how the narrator processes his life.  
Flow and embeddedness are both structural components of the work. They can be found at every scale, from the sentence level to the broader volume level. Proust uses them in a way that is entirely complimentary to each other. The flow state of consciousness enables thoughts to come out of other ones, creating the nested pattern of ideas. The embedded structure, however, keeps the boundless potential of stream of consciousness in check. Together they make a cohesive structure that is both natural and unique to Proust. In the end, these structural patterns are so inherent to Proust’s writing that they serve as thematic elements. The novel revolves around flow and buried images as central ideas. Characters embody them, the narrator lives them, and the reader absorbs them.        

Works Cited  
Proust, Marcel. *Swann’s Way*. Translated by Lydia Davis, Penguin Books, 2002\.   
